# First-principles prediction of the information processing capacity of a simple genetic circuit
This repository serves as a record for the experimental and theoretical work
described in the publication "First-principles prediction of the information
processing capacity of a simple genetic circuit" by Manuel Razo-Mejia Sarah 
Marzen and Rob Phillips.

## Abstract
Given the stochastic nature of gene expression, genetically identical cells
exposed to the same environmental inputs will produce different outputs. This
heterogeneity has been hypothesized to have consequences for how cells are
able to survive in changing environments. Recent work has explored the use of
information theory as a framework to understand the accuracy with which cells
can ascertain the state of their surroundings. Yet the predictive power of
these approaches is limited and has not been rigorously tested using
precision measurements. To that end, we generate a minimal model for a simple
genetic circuit in which all parameter values for the model come from
independently published data sets. We then predict the information processing
capacity of the genetic circuit for a suite of biophysical parameters such as
protein copy number and protein-DNA affinity. We compare these parameter-free
predictions with an experimental determination of protein distributions and
the information processing capacity of {\it E. coli} cells, and find that our
minimal model describes the experimental data within a systematic
multiplicative deviation. This work assembles insights from state-of-the-art
models of gene regulation and exposes unresolved questions.
