# `pickle` files

As an output of some of the scripts either `pkl` or `dill` files are saved to
be imported later on for costly calculations. These files are mainly the output
of `lambdify` functions from `sympy`, where an analytical result is turned into
a function that can be numerically evaluated using `numpy`.

The functions are not pushed to the `GitHub` repo given the large file size.
But these folder is added such that when interested users want to run the
notebooks that generate the files, these files can be directly exported to this
location.

The important files in this directory are:


- `two_state_moment_lambdify.dill`, `three_state_moment_lambdify.dill` :  These
  files, generated by the notebook
  `chemical_master_steady_state_moments_general.ipynb`, are `lambdify`
  functions generated with `sympy` that compute the numerical value of the
  moments of the mRNA and protein distribution given a set of rate parameters.
  Specifically the functions evaluate up to the **third protein moment**
  $\left\langle m^0 p^3 \right\rangle$ with all the necessary lower moments.
  These moments assume that both, the mRNA and the protein distribution reach
  steady state, and don't account for the gene copy number variation that cells
  go through as they replicate their genomes and divide.
    - NOTE : These particular functions had to be exported using the
      `cloudpickle` library rather than the usual `pickle` library for reasons
      I don't fully understand.

- `two_state_protein_dynamics_matrix.pkl`,
  `three_state_protein_dynamics_matrix.pkl` : These files, generated by the
  notebook `moment_dynamics_system.ipynb` generate the matrix that defines the
  right-hand side of the ODEs for the mRNA and protein dynamics. Given a set of
  rate parameters, this matrix can be evaluated numerically and then used with
  `scipy.integrate.odeint` to numerically integrate the dynamics of the
  moments. Specifically these functions evaluate up to the **sixth protein
  moment** $\left\langle m^0 p^6 \right\rangle$ with all the necessary lower
  moments.
  - NOTE : These particular functions had to be exported using the
      `cloudpickle` library rather than the usual `pickle` library for reasons
      I don't fully understand.

- `binom_coeff_matrix.pkl` : This file, exported by the notebook
  `binomial_moments.ipynb` contains a numerical matrix used to compute the
  moments of the mRNA and protein distribution right after a cell divided and
  each of the molecules underwent a binomial partitioning event.